Chapter 11: Reviews App
In this chapter we’ll add a reviews app so that readers can leave reviews of their
favorite books. It gives us a chance to discuss foreign keys, app structure, and dive
into forms.
Foreign Keys
We’ve already used a foreign key with our user model, but didn’t have to think about
it. Now we do! Fundamentally a database table can be thought of as similar to a
spreadsheet with rows and columns. There needs to be a primary key field that is
unique and refers to each record. In the last chapter we changed that from id to a
UUID, but one still exists!
This matters when we want to link two tables together. For example, our Books model
will link to a Reviews model since each review has to be connected to a relevant book.
This implies a foreign key relationship.
There are three possible types of foreign key relationships:
• One-to-one197
• One-to-many198
• Many-to-many199
197 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#onetoonefield
198 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#foreignkey
199 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#manytomanyfield
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 219
A one-to-one relationship is the simplest kind. An example would be a table of people’s
names and a table of social security numbers. Each person has only one social security
number and each social security number is linked to only one person.
In practice one-to-one relationships are rare. It’s unusual for both sides of a relation-
ship to only be matched to one counterpart. Some other examples though would be
country-flag or person-passport.
A one-to-many relationship is far more common and is the default foreign key200
setting within Django. For example, one student can sign up for many classes. Or
an employee has one job title, maybe “Software Engineer,” but there can be many
software engineers within a given company.
It’s also possible to have a ManyToManyField201 relationship. Let’s consider a list of
books and a list of authors: each book could have more than one author and each
author can write more than one book. That’s a many-to-many relationship. Just as
with the previous two examples you need a linked Foreign Key field to connect the two
lists. Additional examples include doctors and patients (every doctor sees multiple
patients and vice versa) or employees and tasks (each employee has multiple tasks
while each task is worked on by multiple employees).
Database design is a fascinating, deep topic that is both an art and a science. As the
number of tables grow in a project over time it is almost inevitable that a refactoring
will need to occur to address issues around inefficiency, bloat, and outright errors.
Normalization202 is the process of structuring a relational database though far beyond
the scope of this book.
200 [ForeignKey](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#foreignkey)
201 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#manytomanyfield
202 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_normalization
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 220
Reviews model
Coming back to our basic reviews app, the first consideration is what type of foreign
key relationship will there be. If we are going to link a user to a review, then it is
a straightforward one-to-many relationship. However it could also be possible to
link books to reviews which would be many-to-many. The “correct” choice quickly
becomes somewhat subjective and certainly dependent upon the particular needs of
the project.
In this project we’ll treat the reviews app as a one-to-many between authors and
reviews as it’s the simpler approach.
Here again we face a choice around how to design our project. Do we add the Reviews
model within our existing books/models.py file or create a dedicated reviews app that
we then link to? Let’s start by adding a Reviews model to the books app.
Code
# books/models.py
import uuid
from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model # new
from django.db import models
from django.urls import reverse
class Book(models.Model):
id = models.UUIDField(
primary_key=True,
default=uuid.uuid4,
editable=False)
title = models.CharField(max_length=200)
Chapter 11: Reviews App
author = models.CharField(max_length=200)
price = models.DecimalField(max_digits=6, decimal_places=2)
def __str__(self):
return self.title
def get_absolute_url(self):
return reverse('book_detail', kwargs={'pk': str(self.pk)})
221
class Review(models.Model): # new
book = models.ForeignKey(
Book,
on_delete=models.CASCADE,
related_name='reviews',
)
review = models.CharField(max_length=255)
author = models.ForeignKey(
get_user_model(),
on_delete=models.CASCADE,
)
def__str__(self):
return self.review
At the top under imports include get_user_model which is needed to refer to our
CustomUser model, then create a dedicated Review model. The book field is the one-to-
many foreign key that links Book to Review and we’re following the standard practice
of naming it the same as the linked model. All many-to-one relationships now require
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 222
we specify an on_delete203 option, too. The review field contains the actual content
which perhaps could be a TextField204 depending on how much space you want to
provide for review length! For now, we’ll force reviews to be short at 255 characters
or less. And then we’ll also link to the author field to auto-populate the current user
with the review.
For all many-to-one relationships such as a ForeignKey we must also specify an on_-
delete205 option. And we’re using get_user_model206 to reference our custom user
model.
Create a new migrations file for our changes and then run migrate to apply them.
Command Line
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py makemigrations books
Migrations for 'books':
books/migrations/0002_review.py
- Create model Review
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py migrate
Admin
For the reviews app to appear in the admin we need to update books/admin.py
substantially by adding the Review model and specifying a display of TabularInline207 .
203 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#django.db.models.ForeignKey.on_delete
204 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#django.db.models.TextField
205 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/fields/#django.db.models.ForeignKey.on_delete
206 https://wsvincent.com/django-referencing-the-user-model/
207 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/contrib/admin/#django.contrib.admin.TabularInline
Chapter 11: Reviews App
Code
# books/admin.py
from django.contrib import admin
from .models import Book, Review
class ReviewInline(admin.TabularInline):
model = Review
223
class BookAdmin(admin.ModelAdmin):
inlines = [
ReviewInline,
]
list_display = ("title", "author", "price",)
admin.site.register(Book, BookAdmin)
Now navigate to the books section at http://127.0.0.1:8000/admin/books/book/208
and then click on any of the books to see the reviews visible on the individual book
page.
208 http://127.0.0.1:8000/admin/books/book/
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 224
Django for Professionals Admin Reviews
We’re limited to reviews by existing users at this point, although we have previously
created a testuser@email.com that was deleted when we removed the database volume
mount in the previous chapter. There are two options for adding this account: we
could go to the main site and use the “Sign Up” link or we can add it directly from the
admin. Let’s do the latter. From the Users section on the Admin homepage click on
the “+ Add” button. Add a new user called testuser.
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 225
Admin testuser
Then on the next page add testuser@email.com as the email address. Scroll down to
the bottom of the page and click the “Save” button.
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 226
Admin testuser
Ok, finally, we can add reviews to the “Django for Professionals” book using testuser.
Navigate back to the Books section and click on the correct book. Write two reviews
and as AUTHOR make sure to select testuser.
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 227
Add Two Reviews
Templates
With the reviews model set it’s time to update our templates to display reviews on
the individual page for each book. Add a basic “Reviews” section and then loop over
all existing reviews. Since this is a foreign key relationship we follow it by using
book.reviews.all. Then display the review field with review.review and the author
with review.author.
Chapter 11: Reviews App
Code
# templates/books/book_detail.html
{% extends '_base.html' %}
{% block title %}{{ book.title }}{% endblock title %}
228
{% block content %}
<div class="book-detail">
<h2><a href="">{{ book.title }}</a></h2>
<p>Author: {{ book.author }}</p>
<p>Price: {{ book.price }}</p>
<div>
<h3>Reviews</h3>
<ul>
{% for review in book.reviews.all %}
<li>{{ review.review }} ({{ review.author }})</li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>
</div>
</div>
{% endblock content %}
That’s it! Navigate over to the “Django for Professionals” individual page to see the
result. Your url will be different than the one here because we’re using a UUID.
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 229
Reviews on Detail Page
Tests
Time for tests. We need to create a new user for our review and add a review to the
setUp method in our test suite. Then we can test that the book object contains the
correct review.
This involves importing get_user_model as well as adding the Review model at the top.
We can use create_user to make a new user called reviewuser and then a review object
that is linked to our single book object. Finally under test_book_detail_view we can
add an additional assertContains test to the response object.
Chapter 11: Reviews App
Code
# books/tests.py
from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model # new
from django.test import Client, TestCase
from django.urls import reverse
from .models import Book, Review # new
class BookTests(TestCase):
def setUp(self):
self.user = get_user_model().objects.create_user( # new
username='reviewuser',
email='reviewuser@email.com',
password='testpass123'
)
self.book = Book.objects.create(
title='Harry Potter',
author='JK Rowling',
price='25.00',
)
self.review = Review.objects.create( # new
book = self.book,
author = self.user,
review = 'An excellent review',
)
230
Chapter 11: Reviews App
def test_book_listing(self):
self.assertEqual(f'{self.book.title}', 'Harry Potter')
self.assertEqual(f'{self.book.author}', 'JK Rowling')
self.assertEqual(f'{self.book.price}', '25.00')
def test_book_list_view(self):
response = self.client.get(reverse('book_list'))
self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 200)
self.assertContains(response, 'Harry Potter')
self.assertTemplateUsed(response, 'books/book_list.html')
def test_book_detail_view(self):
response = self.client.get(self.book.get_absolute_url())
no_response = self.client.get('/books/12345/')
self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 200)
self.assertEqual(no_response.status_code, 404)
self.assertContains(response, 'Harry Potter')
self.assertContains(response, 'An excellent review') # new
self.assertTemplateUsed(response, 'books/book_detail.html')
If you run the tests now they all should pass.
231
Chapter 11: Reviews App
Command Line
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py test
Creating test database for alias 'default'...
System check identified no issues (0 silenced).
.................
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 17 tests in 0.675s
232
OK
Destroying test database for alias 'default'...
Git
Add our new code changes to Git and include a commit message for the chapter.
Command Line
$ git status
....
$ git add .
$ git commit -m 'ch11'
The code for this chapter can be found on the official Github repository209 .
Conclusion
With more time we might update the reviews’ functionality with a form on the page
itself, however this means AJAX calls using jQuery, React, Vue, or another dedicated
209 https://github.com/wsvincent/djangoforprofessionals/tree/master/ch11-reviews
Chapter 11: Reviews App
 233
JavaScript framework. Unfortunately covering that fully is well beyond the scope of
this book.
As the project grows it might also make sense to split reviews off into its own
dedicated app. Doing so is a very subjective call. In general, keeping things as simple
as possible–adding foreign keys within an existing app until it becomes too large to
easily understand–is a solid approach.
In the next chapter we will add image uploads to our site so there can be covers for
each book.