Chapter 13: Permissions
Currently there are no permissions set on our Bookstore project. Any user, even one
not logged in, can visit any page and perform any available action. While this is fine for
prototyping, implementing a robust permissions structure is a must before deploying
a website to production.
Django comes with built-in authorization options218 for locking down pages to either
logged in users, specific groups, or users with the proper individual permission.
Logged-In Users Only
Confusingly there are multiple ways to add even the most basic permission: re-
stricting access only to logged-in users. It can be done in a raw way219 using the
login_required()220 decorator, or since we are using class-based views so far via the
LoginRequired mixin221 .
Let’s start by limiting access to the Books pages only to logged-in users. There is a link
for it in the navbar so this is not the case of a user accidentally finding a URL (which
also can happen); in this case the URL is quite public.
First import LoginRequiredMixin at the top and then add it before ListView since mixins
are loaded from left-to-right. That way the first thing that is checked is whether
the user is logged in; if they’re not there’s no need to load the ListView. The other
part is setting a login_url for the user to be redirected to. This is the URL name for
218 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#permissions-and-authorization
219 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#the-raw-way
220 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#the-login-required-decorator
221 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#the-login-required-decorator
Chapter 13: Permissions
 248
log in which, since we’re using django-allauth is account_login. If we were using the
traditional Django authentication system then this link would be called simply login.
The structure for BookDetailView is the same: add LoginRequiredMixin and a login_url
route.
Code
# books/views.py
from django.contrib.auth.mixins import LoginRequiredMixin # new
from django.views.generic import ListView, DetailView
from .models import Book
class BookListView(LoginRequiredMixin, ListView): # new
model = Book
context_object_name = 'book_list'
template_name = 'books/book_list.html'
login_url = 'account_login' # new
class BookDetailView(LoginRequiredMixin, DetailView): # new
model = Book
context_object_name = 'book'
template_name = 'books/book_detail.html'
login_url = 'account_login' # new
And that’s it! If you now log out of your account and click on the “Books” link it will
automatically redirect you to the Log In page. However if you are logged in, the Books
page loads normally.
Chapter 13: Permissions
 249
Even if you somehow knew the UUID of a specific book page you’d be redirected to
Log In as well!
Permissions
Django comes with a basic permissions system222 that is controlled through the
Django admin. To demonstrate it we need to create a new user account. Navigate
back to the Admin homepage and then click on “+ Add” next to Users.
We’ll call this new user special and set a password of testpass123. Click on the “Save”
button.
Add User
The second page allows us to set an “Email address” to special@email.com. We’re using
222 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#permissions-and-authorization
Chapter 13: Permissions
 250
django-allauth so that our log in page requires only email and the sign up page also
only uses email, but since we didn’t customize the admin as well it still expects a
username when creating a new user this way.
User Email
If we had wanted to fully rip out the default user system that would mean using
AbstractBaseUsera rather than AbstractUser back in Chapter 3 when we configured
our custom user model.
ahttps://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/customizing/#django.contrib.auth.models.
AbstractBaseUser
Scrolling down further on the page to the bottom there are options to set Groups as
well as User permissions. This is a long list of defaults Django provides.
Chapter 13: Permissions
 251
User Permissions
For now we won’t use them since we’ll create a custom permission in the next section
so just click on the “Save” button in the lower right corner so that our email address
is updated for the user account.
Chapter 13: Permissions
 252
Custom Permissions
Setting custom permissions223 is a much more common occurrence in a Django
project. We can set them via the Meta class on our database models.
For example, let’s add a special status so that an author can read all books. In other
words they have access to the DetailView. We could be much more specific with the
permissions, restricting them per book, but this is a good first step.
In the books/models.py file we’ll add a Meta class and set both the permission name
and a description which will be visible in the admin.
Code
# books/models.py
...
class Book(models.Model):
id = models.UUIDField(
primary_key=True,
default=uuid.uuid4,
editable=False)
title = models.CharField(max_length=200)
author = models.CharField(max_length=200)
price = models.DecimalField(max_digits=6, decimal_places=2)
cover = models.ImageField(upload_to='covers/', blank=True)
class Meta: # new
permissions = [
('special_status', 'Can read all books'),
]
223 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/customizing/#custom-permissions
Chapter 13: Permissions
 253
def __str__(self):
return self.title
def get_absolute_url(self):
return reverse('book_detail', args=[str(self.id)])
...
The order of the inner classes and methods here is deliberate. It follows the Model
stylea section from the Django documentation.
ahttps://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/internals/contributing/writing-code/coding-style/
#model-style
Since we have updated our database model we must create a new migrations file and
then apply it.
Command Line
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py makemigrations books
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py migrate
User Permissions
Now we need to apply this custom permission to our new special user. Thanks to the
admin this is not a difficult task. Navigate to the Users section where the three exist-
ing users are listed: special@email.com, testuser@email.com, and will@wsvincent.com
which is my superuser account.
Chapter 13: Permissions
 254
Three Users
Click on the special@email.com user and then scroll down to User permissions near
the bottom of the page. Within it search for books | book | Can read all books
and select it by clicking on the -> arrow to add it to “Chosen user permissions.” Don’t
forget to click the “Save” button at the bottom of the page.
Chapter 13: Permissions
 255
Add Permission
PermissionRequiredMixin
The last step is to apply the custom permission using the PermissionRequiredMixin224.
One of the many great features of class-based views is we can implement advanced
224 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#the-permissionrequiredmixin-mixin
Chapter 13: Permissions
 256
functionality with very little code on our part and this particular mixin is a good
example of that.
Add PermissionRequiredMixin to our list of imports on the top line. Then add it to
DetailView after LoginRequiredMixin but before DetailView. The order should make
sense: if a user isn’t already logged in it makes no sense to do the additional check of
whether they have permission. Finally add a permission_required field which specifies
the desired permission. In our case its name is special_status and it exists on the
books model.
Code
# books/views.py
from django.contrib.auth.mixins import (
LoginRequiredMixin,
PermissionRequiredMixin # new
)
from django.views.generic import ListView, DetailView
from .models import Book
class BookListView(LoginRequiredMixin, ListView):
model = Book
context_object_name = 'book_list'
template_name = 'books/book_list.html'
login_url = 'account_login'
class BookDetailView(
LoginRequiredMixin,
Chapter 13: Permissions
PermissionRequiredMixin, # new
DetailView):
model = Book
context_object_name = 'book'
template_name = 'books/book_detail.html'
login_url = 'account_login'
permission_required = 'books.special_status' # new
257
Although we are not doing it here it is possible to add multiple permissions225 via the
permission_required field.
To try out our work, log out of the admin. This is necessary because the superuser
account is used for the admin and by default has access to everything. Not a great
user account to test with!
Log in to the Bookstore site using the testuser@email.com account and then navigate
to the Books page listing the three available titles. If you then click on any one of the
books, you’ll see a “403 Forbidden” error because permission was denied.
403 Error Page
Now go back to the homepage at http://127.0.0.1:8000/226 and log out. Then log in
using the special@email.com account. Navigate again to the Books page and each
individual book page is accessible.
225 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#the-permissionrequiredmixin-mixin
226 http://127.0.0.1:8000/
Chapter 13: Permissions
 258
Groups & UserPassesTestMixin
The third permissions mixin available is UserPassesTestMixin227 which restricts a
view’s access only to users who pass a specific test.
And in large projects Groups228, which are Django’s way of applying permissions to a
category of users, become prominent. If you look on the Admin homepage there is a
dedicated Groups section where they can be added and have permissions set. This is
far more efficient than adding permissions on a per-user basis.
An example of groups is if you have a premium section on your website, a user
upgrading could switch them into the premium group and then have access to
however many specific extra permissions that involves.
Tests
It’s a good idea to run tests whenever a code change has been made. After all, the
whole point of testing is to check that we did not inadvertently cause another part of
the application to fail.
227 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#django.contrib.auth.mixins.UserPassesTestMixin
228 https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/auth/default/#groups
Chapter 13: Permissions
Command Line
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py test
...
Ran 17 tests in 0.519s
259
FAILED (failures=2)
It turns out we do have some failing tests! Specifically test_book_list_view and test_-
book_detail_view are both complain of a 302 status code, meaning a redirection, rather
than a 200 for success. This is because we’ve just added the requirement that log in is
required to view the list of books and for a detail page the user must have a special_-
status permission.
The first step is to import Permission from the built-in auth models. Then within our
BookTests in books/tests.py add the special_status permission to the setUp method
so it is available for all our tests. We’ll transfer the existing single test_book_list_view
test into one for logged in users and one for logged out users. And we’ll update the
detail view test to check if a user has the correct permission.
Code
# books/tests.py
from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model
from django.contrib.auth.models import Permission # new
from django.test import Client, TestCase
from django.urls import reverse
from .models import Book, Review
class BookTests(TestCase):
Chapter 13: Permissions
 260
def setUp(self):
self.user = get_user_model().objects.create_user(
username='reviewuser',
email='reviewuser@email.com',
password='testpass123'
)
self.special_permission = Permission.objects.get(codename='special_status') \
# new
self.book = Book.objects.create(
title='Harry Potter',
author='JK Rowling',
price='25.00',
)
self.review = Review.objects.create(
book = self.book,
author = self.user,
review = 'An excellent review',
)
deftest_book_listing(self):
...
def test_book_list_view_for_logged_in_user(self): # new
self.client.login(email='reviewuser@email.com', password='testpass123')
response = self.client.get(reverse('book_list'))
self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 200)
self.assertContains(response, 'Harry Potter')
self.assertTemplateUsed(response, 'books/book_list.html')
Chapter 13: Permissions
def test_book_list_view_for_logged_out_user(self):
 # new
self.client.logout()
response = self.client.get(reverse('book_list'))
self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 302)
self.assertRedirects(
response, '%s?next=/books/' % (reverse('account_login')))
response = self.client.get(
'%s?next=/books/' % (reverse('account_login')))
self.assertContains(response, 'Log In')
def test_book_detail_view_with_permissions(self): # new
self.client.login(email='reviewuser@email.com', password='testpass123')
self.user.user_permissions.add(self.special_permission)
response = self.client.get(self.book.get_absolute_url())
no_response = self.client.get('/books/12345/')
self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 200)
self.assertEqual(no_response.status_code, 404)
self.assertContains(response, 'Harry Potter')
self.assertContains(response, 'An excellent review')
self.assertTemplateUsed(response, 'books/book_detail.html')
If you run the test suite again all tests should pass.
261
Chapter 13: Permissions
Command Line
$ docker-compose exec web python manage.py test
...
Ran 18 tests in 0.944s
OK
262
Git
Make sure to create a new Git commit for the changes in this chapter.
Command Line
$ git status
$ git add .
$ git commit -m 'ch13'
As always you can compare your code again the official source code on Github229 .
Conclusion
Permissions and groups are a highly subjective area that vary widely from project
to project. However the basics remain the same and mimic what we’ve covered here.
The first pass is typically to restrict access to only logged in users, then add additional
custom permissions from there around groups or users.
In the next chapter we’ll build upon this by adding payments to our Bookstore site.
229 https://github.com/wsvincent/djangoforprofessionals/tree/master/ch13-permissions